
===== PAGE 1 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
        Abstract—Autonomous vehicles rely on multiple sensors, such                 
       ascameras,LiDAR,radars,andGPS,toperceivetheirsurround-                       
       ings and navigate safely. Combining information from diverse                 
       sensors enhances situational awareness by mitigating individual              
       sensor limitations. This research focuses on improving the ac-               
       curacy of object detection, classification, and tracking by fusing           
       LiDAR and camera data using deep learning techniques.This                    
       paper investigates the fusion of LiDAR and camera data us-                   
       ing attention bottlenecks. By combining complementary sensor                 
       strengths,theapproachaddressesindividuallimitationsandnoisy                  
       data challenges. The method, validated on the KITTI dataset,                 
       demonstrates improved perception accuracy and robustness.                    
       Key contributions include implementation of a scalable fusion                
       framework, advancing reliable decision-making for autonomous                 
       navigation in complex scenarios.                                             
        Multi Sensor Data Fusion, Sensor Data Fusion, LIDAR-                        
       Camera Fusion, Data Fusion, Attention Bottlenecks                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
===== PAGE 2 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
        LiDAR-Camera          data   fusion   in  autonomous       vehicle          
                                                                                    
                       using    Attention    Bottlenecks                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                   I. INTRODUCTION                                                  
                                                                                    
        Autonomous vehicles are typically equipped with various                     
       sensors that aid in safe navigation by perceiving the envi-                  
       ronment. These sensors include cameras, LiDAR, and radar,                    
       among others. To improve reliability, multiple complementary                 
       or redundant sensors may be installed. Cameras provide color                 
       and appearance information about the environment. LiDAR                      
       scans the environment and generates a 3D point-cloud rep- Fig. 1: Multi-Sensor data fusion
       resentation, while radar provides range, angle, and velocity                 
       information.                                                                 
        However, each sensor has limitations. For example, camera                   
                                                III. SENSORSINAUTONOMOUSVEHICLES    
       systems provide rich visual information but may degrade                      
       under poor lighting or adverse weather conditions. LiDAR                     
       generates accurate 3D spatial information, but processing Autonomousvehiclesareequippedwithavarietyofsensors
       point clouds can be computationally expensive. Therefore, to perceive their surroundings accurately and make informed
       individual sensors have advantages and disadvantages when decisions in real time. The different sensors complement each
       capturingenvironmentalinformation.Toaddressthis,informa- other,providingamorecompleteandrobustperceptionofthe
       tionfrommultiplesensorscanbefusedtoimproveperception environment.            
       performance. The primary focus of this work is improving                     
       3D object detection by fusing LiDAR and camera data using                    
       attention bottlenecks. By combining information from both                    
       modalities, the model can use complementary spatial and                      
       visualfeatures.Thisexperimentalworkevaluatestheproposed                      
       fusion approach against a LiDAR-only baseline on the KITTI                   
       validation split.                                                            
              II. MULTI-SENSORDATAFUSION                                            
        Multi-sensor data fusion (MSDF) [1] is a technique that                     
       integratesdatafromseveralsensorstoachieveamoreaccurate                       
       andcomprehensiveunderstandingofaspecificenvironmentor                        
       scenario. The aim of multi-sensor data fusion is to enhance                  
       a system’s overall performance by utilizing complementary                    
       information from different sensors, leading to better decision-              
       making and improved situational awareness. Its applications                  
       include autonomous vehicles, defense, robotics, and health-                  
       care.                                                                        
                                             Fig. 2: Autonomous vehicle and sensors. Source: [2].
        Multi-sensor data fusion has gained significant attention                   
       becauseofitsabilitytoaddresscomplexreal-worldproblems.                       
       Many types of sensors, including cameras, LiDAR sensors, Sensor capabilities vary in terms of functionality, output
       radar sensors, and microphones, can provide diverse and data, speed of operation, operating environments, and data
       complementary information about an environment. By inte- quality. The capabilities of a sensor are categorized and
       grating information from multiple sensors, multi-sensor data shown in Figure 3. Relying on a single type of sensor cannot
       fusion can compensate for the limitations and uncertainties of provide all the capabilities required for the reliable operation
       individual sensors, reduce ambiguity, and enhance the overall of an autonomous vehicle system under different operating
       accuracy and reliability of the system. conditions.                          
                                                                                    
===== PAGE 3 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                          Camera                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       Fig. 3: Autonomous vehicle sensor capabilities. Concentric                   
       circles indicate the quality of the output with respect to the               
       specified functionality.                                                     
                                                          LiDAR                     
                                           Fig. 4: Sensor capabilities are highlighted in different colors.
         IV. MULTI-SENSORDATAFUSIONINAUTONOMOUS                                     
                     VEHICLES                                                       
        Fusing data from multiple sensors is a key technique in                     
       autonomous vehicles. LiDAR uses lasers to measure distance                   
       and create 3D point clouds, while cameras capture 2D images                  
       and are used for object recognition and tracking. Radar uses                 
       radiowavestomeasuredistanceandvelocityandisusefulfor Fig. 5: Ideal fusion combines the properties of individual
       detecting objects in adverse weather conditions. Each sensor sensors and provides a union of their capabilities.
       has its own strengths and weaknesses, and combining them                     
       allows the vehicle to benefit from the strengths of each sensor              
       while compensating for its weaknesses. The capabilities of signals from different sensors are fused and fed to the model.
       LiDAR and cameras are highlighted in Figure 4. In mid-level fusion, features are extracted from the sensor
        By fusing data from multiple similar or different sensors, inputs and fused within intermediate layers of the model. In
       an autonomous vehicle can overcome some of the limitations latefusion,theoutputsproducedbyseparatemodality-specific
       ofindividualsensorsandobtainamoreaccurateandcomplete models are combined. Previous studies have evaluated the
       understanding of the environment.   effectiveness of these fusion strategies.
        Anidealfusionsolutioncombinesthepropertiesofindivid- In this paper, we propose an approach for multimodal data
       ualsensorsandprovidesaunionoftheircapabilities.Thiscan fusion for autonomous vehicles.
       help the system operate under a wider range of environmental 1.Weproposeatransformer-baseddatafusionmethodusing
       conditions. An ideal fusion solution should perform better an attention-bottleneck mechanism. The attention bottleneck
       than a single sensor while also ensuring that its performance mediates the exchange of information between the modalities.
       does not significantly degrade when one modality fails. The 2. We apply the framework to LiDAR and camera data.
       capabilities of the sensors and an ideal fusion solution are LiDAR data is encoded into a bird’s-eye-view pseudo-image
       shown in Figure 5.                  using PointPillars, while camera features are geometrically
        However,theprocessofsensorfusionisnotstraightforward aligned with the corresponding bird’s-eye-view cells.
       and requires advanced algorithms to handle different types of 3.WeevaluatethemethodontheKITTI3Dobjectdetection
       data, coordinate systems, and measurement errors. The goal validation split [4].
       is to create a consistent and accurate representation of the                 
       environment that can be used by the vehicle’s control systems                
                                                     V. LITERATURESURVEY            
       to make safe and efficient decisions. With the advancement of Many papers have proposed various fusion techniques to
       machine learning techniques and hardware, many approaches improve the accuracy and robustness of object detection and
       havebeenproposedforLiDAR-cameradatafusion.Generally, tracking. For example, Nabati et al. propose a deep learning-
       these approaches [3] can be categorized as early, mid-level, basedapproachthatfusesradarandcameradatafor3Dobject
       and late fusion, as shown in Figure 6. In early fusion, input detection [5]. 
                                                                                    
===== PAGE 4 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                           projected to 384 channels, added residually to the original
                                           LiDAR BEV representation, and forwarded to the PointPillars
                                           3D detection head.                       
                                           A. Model Architecture                    
                                            As mentioned earlier, we used a fusion transformer [7] to
                                           combineLiDARandcameradatafor3Dobjectdetection.The
                                           architectureofthefusiontransformerisshowninFigure7.The
                                           model takes paired camera images and point clouds as input.
                                           The point cloud is encoded into a bird’s-eye-view pseudo-
                                           imageusingPointPillars,whilethecameraimageisprocessed
                                           using a ResNet-18 backbone. The resulting feature maps are
                                           represented as 16×16 token grids, with the camera features
                                           geometrically aligned with the corresponding LiDAR bird’s-
                                           eye-view cells.                          
       Fig. 6: Fusion strategies. In early fusion, a single model                   
                                            Pointcloudsconsistofaseriesofunordered3Dcoordinates.
       processesmultimodalinputs.Cross-modalinformationiscom-                       
                                           Due to the computationally intensive nature of processing
       bined within intermediate layers in mid-level fusion. Inputs                 
                                           point clouds, they are encoded into a bird’s-eye-view pseudo-
       are processed using separate models and their outputs are                    
                                           image using a PillarFeatureNet. The camera image is resized
       combined in late fusion. In bottleneck fusion, cross-modal                   
                                           and processed by ResNet-18 pretrained on ImageNet. The
       information is exchanged through attention-bottleneck tokens.                
                                           resultingLiDARandcamerafeaturesareconvertedintotokens
                                           before being processed by the fusion model.
                                            In addition to the LiDAR and camera tokens (x ,x ),
        A recent trend in the literature is the use of deep learning-  lidar image  
                                           a small set of fusion tokens is added to each modality
       based methods for multi-sensor data fusion. In “Deep Sensor                  
                                           sequence. Fusion tokens (bottleneck tokens) x are intro-
       Fusion for Autonomous Driving: A Survey,” the authors pro-    fusion         
                                           duced to restrict cross-modal information flow through the
       vide a comprehensive survey of deep learning-based sensor-                   
                                           attention bottlenecks [7]. Each modality interacts with the
       fusionmethodsforautonomousdrivingandtheirperformance                         
                                           shared bottleneck tokens using separate transformer param-
       [3].Thepaperdiscussesdifferentfusiontechniques,including                     
                                           eters, and the bottleneck updates from the two modalities
       Kalmanfiltering,particlefiltering,anddeeplearningmethods.                    
                                           are averaged after each fusion layer. The updated bottleneck
        Some works use camera and LiDAR data together for                           
                                           representation is then used to update the LiDAR tokens,
       semantic segmentation, which involves classifying each pixel                 
                                           allowing complementary information from the camera and
       of an image into an object class. For example, in “Real-                     
                                           LiDAR features to be fused.              
       Time Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous Driving Using                      
                                            The output of the attention-bottleneck fusion block is the
       LiDAR and Camera,” the authors propose a system that fuses                   
                                           final shared bottleneck representation. A LiDAR-query cross-
       LiDAR and camera data for real-time semantic segmentation                    
                                           attention operation reads this representation to produce fused
       [6].                                                                         
                                           LiDAR tokens. These tokens are converted back into a BEV
        In “Attention Bottlenecks for Multimodal Fusion,” Nagrani                   
                                           feature map, projected to 384 channels, and added to the
       et al. address the fusion of different modalities using bottle-              
                                           original LiDAR BEV features before being passed to the
       necklatentsthatcondenserelevantinformationandshareonly                       
                                           PointPillars 3D detection head.          
       what is necessary between modalities [7].                                    
                                           B. Attention Bottlenecks                 
               VI. METHODOLOGYOVERVIEW                                              
                                            Instead of directly concatenating or merging multimodal
        A transformer-based approach [7] is used in this work to                    
                                           embeddings, the model uses attention bottlenecks to mediate
       combine LiDAR and camera data for 3D object detection                        
                                           the fusion. Bottleneck tokens [7] are a small set of trainable
       in autonomous vehicles. The model takes a camera image                       
                                           parametersthatinteractwiththemodality-specificembeddings
       frame and LiDAR point cloud as input. The point cloud is                     
                                           through attention mechanisms. Each modality is processed
       converted into a bird’s-eye-view pseudo-image using Point-                   
                                           separately with the shared bottleneck tokens, and the bot-
       Pillars. The camera features are geometrically aligned with                  
                                           tleneck updates from the two modalities are averaged. This
       the pseudo-image and converted into tokens. A set of fusion                  
                                           designminimizesdirectcross-modalityinteractions,enhancing
       tokens (bottleneck tokens) [7] is inserted with the LiDAR                    
                                           efficiency.                              
       and camera tokens. With the help of attention bottlenecks in                 
                                            We denote LiDAR tokens as               
       the transformer, the model carries out cross-modal attention                 
       through the fusion tokens. After the four fusion layers, the x =[l ,l ,...,l ],
                                                       lidar 1 2 m                  
       LiDAR tokens attend to the final shared bottleneck tokens                    
                                           camera image tokens as                   
       through an additional cross-attention operation. The updated                 
       LiDARtokensarereshapedintoabird’s-eye-viewfeaturemap, x =[i ,i ,...,i ],     
                                                       image 1 2 n                  
===== PAGE 5 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                       1(cid:16)      (cid:17)      
                                                  xl+1 = x˜l+1 +x˜l+1  .    (3)     
                                                  fusion 2 fusion,lidar fusion,image
                                            Here, i represents the LiDAR or camera modality. The
                                           LiDAR and camera tokens exchange information through the
                                           sharedfusiontokens.AfterthefinalfusionlayerL,theLiDAR
                                           tokens attend to the shared bottleneck representation:
                                                                                    
                                           xˆ =LN (cid:0) xL +MHA (cid:0) Q=xL ,K =xL ,V =xL (cid:1)(cid:1) .
                                            lidar  lidar      lidar  fusion fusion  
                                                                            (4)     
                                            The updated LiDAR tokens are reshaped and upsampled to
                                           the original BEV resolution. A 1×1 projection maps them to
                                           384 channels, and the result is added to the original LiDAR
                                           BEV feature map:                         
                                            F   =F  +Conv  (Upsample(Reshape(xˆ ))).
                                             fused lidar 1×1             lidar      
                                                                            (5)     
                                            The fused BEV representation is then processed by the
                                           PointPillars detection head:             
                                                       yˆ=H  (F ).          (6)     
                                                           det fused                
                                           C. Input Representations                 
                                            ALiDARpointcloudisanunstructuredsetofpoints,where
                                           eachpointisrepresentedbyspatialcoordinates(x,y,z).These
                                           coordinates describe positions in the environment relative to
                                           the sensor’s origin. The point cloud also includes intensity,
                                           which represents the reflectivity of an object’s surface. Due
       Fig. 7: Architecture. The model encodes the point cloud into to the computationally intensive nature of processing point
       aLiDARbird’s-eye-viewrepresentationusingPointPillarsand clouds, various methods have been proposed to reduce this
       extracts camera features using ResNet-18. Camera features complexity. In this work, PointPillars [8] partitions the point
       are geometrically aligned with the LiDAR bird’s-eye-view cloudintoverticalpillarsandusesaPillarFeatureNettoencode
       cells. Cross-modal information is exchanged through shared the points within each pillar.
       attention-bottleneck tokens. The final bottleneck state updates              
                                            The encoded pillar features are scattered onto a 2D bird’s-
       the LiDAR tokens through cross-attention, and the resulting eye-view grid. The x-axis spans (0,69.12) meters, and the
       featuresareresiduallycombinedwiththeoriginalLiDARBEV y-axis spans (−39.68,39.68) meters. Each grid cell covers
       representation before being passed to the 3D detection head. 0.16×0.16 meters. The resulting pseudo-image is processed
                                           by the SECOND backbone and SECONDFPN neck.
                                            The camera image is provided in RGB format and resized
       and fusion tokens as                                                         
                                           toamaximumsizeof1280×384whilemaintainingitsaspect
                 x   =[f ,f ,...,f ].      ratio. The image is processed by a ResNet-18 backbone, and
                  fusion 1 2  b                                                     
                                           its features are geometrically aligned with the LiDAR bird’s-
        For each modality i ∈ {lidar,image}, the modality tokens                    
                                           eye-viewcellsusingtheKITTIcalibrationparametersandfour
       are concatenated with the shared fusion tokens:                              
                                           height queries.                          
                   sl =[xl||xl ].       (1)                                         
                    i  i  fusion           D. Output Representations                
        The modality-specific transformer processes the resulting                   
                                            The transformer-based model processes the bottleneck-
       sequence:                                                                    
                                           enhanced embeddings, capturing relationships within and
                                           across modalities. The fused LiDAR representation is passed
              [xl+1||x˜l+1 ]=Transformerl(sl). (2)                                  
               i   fusion,i    i i         to the PointPillars 3D detection head, which predicts object
        The bottleneck updates from the LiDAR and camera classes, confidence scores, 3D bounding boxes, and orienta-
       branches are then averaged:         tions.                                   
===== PAGE 6 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    VII. DATASET           BEV feature map. The bottleneck tokens are initialized with
                                           a standard deviation of 0.02, and the residual projection is
        We evaluate the model using the KITTI dataset [4], a                        
                                           initialized to zero. During training, 15% of the LiDAR tokens
       widely used benchmark in autonomous-driving research. It                     
                                           incamera-visibleregionsand10%oftheLiDARBEVfeature
       was created by the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and                     
                                           channels are randomly dropped. An auxiliary class-specific
       the Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. It includes a                 
                                           camera-BEV center-prediction loss with a weight of 0.25 is
       collectionofimagesandLiDARdatausedincomputervision                           
                                           alsoapplied.Thisdesignensuresefficient,parameter-effective
       research for tasks such as stereo vision, optical flow, visual               
                                           feature fusion while preserving the PointPillars detection rep-
       odometry,3Dobjectdetection,and3Dtracking.Thedatawere                         
                                           resentation.                             
       captured while driving through the city of Karlsruhe, as well                
       as through rural areas and on highways. Data were collected ThemodelwasinitializedusingthebestLiDAR-onlyPoint-
       usingtwocolorandtwograyscalecameras(10Hz,resolution: Pillars checkpoint. The LiDAR encoder and detection head
       1392 × 512 pixels, field of view: 90◦ × 35◦), a Velodyne were frozen for the first five epochs and subsequently fine-
       HDL-64E 3D laser scanner (10 Hz, 64 beams, range: 100 m), tunedwiththecompletemodel.Thebaselearningratewasset
       and a GPS/IMU localization unit. The dataset also provides to 0.0003, with a learning rate of 0.0006 for the camera and
       benchmarks and evaluation metrics for each task. fusion components and 0.00015 for the LiDAR and detection
                                           components.Themodelwastrainedfor40epochs.Themodel
              VIII. IMPLEMENTATIONDETAILS                                           
                                           was trained with a physical batch size of 6 and eight-step
        The model is implemented in PyTorch and tested using the gradient accumulation, resulting in an effective batch size of
       KITTIdataset[4].Itusesseparatebackbonenetworksforeach 48.                    
       modality.ResNet-18pretrainedonImageNetisusedonimage                          
       frames, while PointPillars is used on point clouds. The image IX. RESULTSANDANALYSIS
       frame is resized to a maximum size of 1280 × 384 while                       
                                           A. Quantitative Results                  
       maintaining its aspect ratio. These backbones encode each                    
                                            The LiDAR-only PointPillars reference and the attention-
       modality into feature embeddings. A camera frame and its                     
                                           bottleneckfusiondetectorwereevaluatedonthe3,769-sample
       associated point cloud are sampled together from the dataset.                
                                           KITTIvalidationsplitusingAP .Bothmodelsusedthesame
       A 16×16 token grid is formed from the point-cloud pseudo- 40                 
                                           validation split, object classes, point-cloud range, effective
       image, while the image features are geometrically aligned                    
                                           batch size, random seed, and KITTI evaluator. The best
       with the corresponding bird’s-eye-view cells using the KITTI                 
                                           checkpointforeachmodelwasselectedusingoverall3DAP
       camera-to-LiDAR calibration and four height queries. In the          40      
                                           at moderate difficulty. The LiDAR-only reference reached its
       pseudo-image, the x-axis spans (0,69.12) meters and the y-                   
                                           best result at epoch 28, while the fusion detector reached its
       axis spans (−39.68,39.68) meters. Each cell is (0.16,0.16)                   
                                           best result at epoch 20. The overall results are presented in
       meters in the x and y directions.                                            
                                           Table I.                                 
        Thepseudo-imageencodertakesthefour-dimensionalpoint                         
                                            AsshowninTableI,theattention-bottleneckfusiondetector
       features and processes them using a PillarFeatureNet. The                    
                                           outperforms the LiDAR-only reference at every BEV and 3D
       encoded pillar features are scattered into a bird’s-eye-view                 
                                           difficulty level. At moderate difficulty, it improves BEV AP
       pseudo-image and processed by a SECOND backbone and                  40      
                                           by 1.7604 points and 3D AP by 3.9828 points. The latter is
       SECONDFPN neck. The resulting high-level LiDAR feature 40                    
                                           a 10.30% relative improvement over the LiDAR-only result.
       representation contains 384 channels and preserves the spatial               
       structure required for 3D object detection. The per-class moderate 3D AP 40 results are presented in
        Theattentionbottlenecksareimplementedbyaclasscalled Table II.               
       SymmetricMBTBEVFusion. The SymmetricMBTBEVFusion As shown in Table II, fusion improves moderate 3D AP 40
       class uses four learnable bottleneck tokens and PyTorch’s for all three classes. The largest absolute improvement is
       nn.MultiheadAttention to fuse point-cloud and RGB observedforCar,followedbyCyclistandPedestrian.Thebest
       features. Both modality feature maps are projected to an fusion checkpoint obtains a moderate 3D AP 40 of 42.6696 at
       embeddingdimensionof128andrepresentedbygeometrically epoch 20, compared with 41.5993 at epoch 40. This decrease
       aligned 16×16 token grids. Each modality concatenates its indicates mild overfitting during the second half of training
       featuretokenswiththesharedbottlenecktokensandprocesses and supports validation-based checkpoint selection.
       them using separate transformer parameters. The bottleneck                   
                                           B. Camera Ablation                       
       updates produced by the point-cloud and RGB branches are                     
       averaged after each fusion layer. Four fusion layers with eight The best fusion checkpoint was reevaluated with correct
       attention heads are used. The fused representation is then camera images, all-black images, and a deterministic seed-0
       usedtoupdatetheLiDARtokensthroughanadditionalcross- derangement of the validation images. In the shuffled condi-
       attention step. Camera information is communicated to the tion, every LiDAR sample receives an image from a different
       LiDARrepresentationthroughthesharedbottlenecktokens.A validation sample while its LiDAR points and annotations
       lightweight 1×1 residual projection maps the fused features remain unchanged. The results of these experiments are pre-
       back to 384 channels and adds them to the original LiDAR sented in Table III.
===== PAGE 7 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             TABLE I: Overall KITTI validation AP for the LiDAR-only and attention-bottleneck fusion models.
                                    40                                              
                                      BEVAP40          3DAP40                       
                    Model          Easy Moderate Hard Easy Moderate Hard            
                    LiDAR-onlyPointPillars 64.5245 52.8874 49.6791 49.5614 38.6868 36.1066
                    Attention-bottleneckfusion 66.3382 54.6478 51.9588 54.4341 42.6696 39.9782
                    Difference    +1.8137 +1.7604 +2.2797 +4.8727 +3.9828 +3.8716   
         TABLE II: Per-class 3D AP at moderate difficulty.                          
                         40                                                         
            Class  LiDAR-only Fusion Difference                                     
            Pedestrian 30.3730 32.2419 +1.8689                                      
            Cyclist  34.1321 37.7407 +3.6086                                        
            Car      51.5553 58.0263 +6.4710                                        
       TABLEIII:Camera-inputablationatmoderatedifficultyusing                       
       the epoch-20 fusion checkpoint.                                              
              Camerainput BEVAP40 3DAP40                                            
              Correctimage 54.6478 42.6696                                          
              Blackimage 54.1208 42.3851                                            
              Shuffledimage 53.9806 42.0954                                         
        As shown in Table III, shuffling the camera input reduces                   
       moderateBEVAP by0.6672pointsandmoderate3DAP                                  
                 40                     40                                          
       by 0.5742 points. It changes the predictions in 3,716 of the                 
       3,769validationframes,demonstratingthatimageinformation                      
       influences the detector. The strongest class-specific effect is              
       observed for Pedestrian, whose moderate 3D AP decreases                      
                                  40                                                
       from 32.2419 to 30.4090 under image shuffling. The corre-                    
       sponding changes for Car and Cyclist are small and are not                   
       consistently positive. Thus, useful camera information is most               
       evident for pedestrian detection, while LiDAR remains the                    
       dominant modality overall.                                                   
                                           Fig. 8: Attention rollout for Pedestrian, Cyclist, and Car
       C. Attention Visualization                                                   
                                           examples. The left column projects attention onto the camera
        Figure 8 visualizes a head-averaged, last-layer attention image, while the right column shows the same attention in
       rolloutfromaselectedLiDARdetectiontokenthroughthefour BEVtogetherwithLiDARpointsanddetections.Whiteboxes
       shared bottleneck tokens to the geometrically aligned camera identify the selected ground-truth object and corresponding
       tokens.Onemoderate-difficultytruepositiveisshownforeach prediction.          
       class.Examplesareselectedusingafixedvisualization-quality                    
       criterion that combines detection confidence, object visibility,             
       andattentionoverlapinbothcameraandBEVspace.Camera- demonstrate causal camera use; the camera-input ablation in
       invisible BEV cells are excluded, and each map is normalized Table III provides stronger evidence.
       independently for visualization; therefore, color magnitude                  
                                           D. Discussion and Limitations            
       should not be compared across examples.                                      
        The maps show nonuniform but generally diffuse attention The results in Tables I and II show that the proposed
       over camera-visible scene regions. The top 10% of valid attention-bottleneck fusion detector performs better than the
       camera cells contain 21.04%, 19.39%, and 37.57% of the LiDAR-only reference on the KITTI validation split. Camera
       attention mass for the displayed Pedestrian, Cyclist, and Car ablations demonstrate a measurable contribution from visual
       examples, respectively. Attention peaks overlap the selected content,particularlyforpedestrians.However,theablationgap
       objects in these examples while also covering nearby objects issmallerthanthetotalimprovementoverLiDAR-only,sothe
       and scene context. This behavior is expected from four global fullgaincannotbeattributedtocamerainformationalone.The
       bottleneck tokens, which compress scene-level information additional attention layers, bottleneck representation, LiDAR-
       rather than enforcing object-localized correspondence. Be- side processing, warm start, and staged fine-tuning may also
       cause the examples were selected partly for attention over- contribute.      
       lap, they are illustrative rather than representative. The maps The experiments use one random seed and the validation
       visualize active attention pathways but do not by themselves split rather than the official KITTI test server. Consequently,
===== PAGE 8 =====
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       variation across training runs has not been measured. Addi- [8] A. H. Lang, S. Vora, H. Caesar, L. Zhou, J. Yang, and O. Beijbom,
       tional seeds and comparisons with alternative fusion architec- “Pointpillars: Fast encoders for object detection from point clouds,” in
                                             ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionandpattern
       turesarerequiredbeforeclaimingthatattentionbottlenecksare                    
                                             recognition,2019,pp.12697–12705.       
       generally superior to other fusion methods. Attention weights [9] J. Lin, C. Gan, and S. Han, “Tsm: Temporal shift module for efficient
       should also be interpreted as model diagnostics rather than video understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
                                             conferenceoncomputervision,2019,pp.7083–7093.
       causal explanations.                                                         
                  X. FUTUREWORK                                                     
        This work explored the fusion of LiDAR and camera data                      
       using attention bottlenecks. Future work will include more                   
       extensive ablation studies to evaluate the effects of the num-               
       ber of bottleneck tokens, attention heads, fusion layers, and                
       fusion-stage placement. The model should also be evaluated                   
       across multiple random seeds and compared with alternative                   
       fusion architectures to better establish the effectiveness of the            
       proposed approach.                                                           
        Another direction is to incorporate temporal sensor data                    
       [9]. Processing consecutive camera frames and LiDAR scans                    
       could allow the model to use motion information, potentially                 
       improving the detection and tracking of moving or partially                  
       occluded objects.                                                            
        Finally,futureexperimentscouldcomparefusionatdifferent                      
       stages of the network. Earlier fusion may preserve more                      
       low-level cross-modal information, whereas later fusion may                  
       combine more semantically developed features. Evaluating                     
       these alternatives could identify the most effective placement               
       for the attention bottleneck module.                                         
                   XI. CONCLUSION                                                   
        We implemented and evaluated a transformer-based fusion                     
       technique for LiDAR and camera data fusion for autonomous                    
       vehicles. We used cross-modal information exchange through                   
       attention bottlenecks [7]. The fusion model outperformed the                 
       LiDAR-only baseline on the KITTI validation split. There is                  
       still scope for future work to improve the performance of the                
       fusionmodelanddevelopbetterstrategiesforfusingdatafrom                       
       multiple modalities.                                                         
                    REFERENCES                                                      
       [1] D. L. Hall and J. Llinas, “An introduction to multisensor data fusion,”  
         ProceedingsoftheIEEE,vol.85,no.1,pp.6–23,1997.                             
       [2] D. Clarke, “multi-target-multi-source-fusion-in-autonomous-              
         driving-an-introduction,” 2018, accessed: 14-05-2023.                      
         [Online]. Available: https://blogs.sw.siemens.com/automotive-              
         transportation/2018/07/16/multi-target-multi-source-fusion-in-             
         autonomous-driving-an-introduction/                                        
       [3] Z.Wang,Y.Wu,andQ.Niu,“Multi-sensorfusioninautomateddriving:              
         Asurvey,”IeeeAccess,vol.8,pp.2847–2868,2019.                               
       [4] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous         
         driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite,” in Conference on Computer      
         VisionandPatternRecognition(CVPR),2012.                                    
       [5] M. R. Nabati, “Sensor fusion for object detection and tracking in        
         autonomousvehicles,”2021.                                                  
       [6] D.Kang,A.Wong,B.Lee,andJ.Kim,“Real-timesemanticsegmentation              
         of3dpointcloudforautonomousdriving,”Electronics,vol.10,no.16,              
         p.1960,2021.                                                               
       [7] A. Nagrani, S. Yang, A. Arnab, A. Jansen, C. Schmid, and C. Sun,         
         “Attentionbottlenecksformultimodalfusion,”2022.[Online].Available:         
         https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.00135                                           